CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to OmniScript Core

Thank you for your interest in contributing to **OmniScript Format (OSF)**! We welcome contributions from everyone — whether you're fixing bugs, improving documentation, implementing new features, or helping with testing.

---

## 🚀 Getting Started

### 1️⃣ Fork the repository

Click the **Fork** button at the top right of the [omniscript-core](https://github.com/OmniScriptOSF/omniscript-core) repository page to create your own copy.

### 2️⃣ Clone your fork locally

```bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/omniscript-core.git
cd omniscript-core
git checkout -b my-feature-branch
```

### 3️⃣ Install dependencies (if applicable)

```bash
# For example, if using Node.js
npm install
```

### 4️⃣ Make your changes

* Follow the coding style used in the repo (we will provide linting configs soon).
* Add/update tests where relevant.
* Update documentation if needed.

### 5️⃣ Run tests

```bash
npm test
# or cargo test / pytest etc., depending on the language used
```

### 6️⃣ Commit and push

```bash
git add .
git commit -m "feat: describe your change concisely"
git push origin my-feature-branch
```

### 7️⃣ Open a Pull Request

Go to your fork on GitHub and click **Compare & pull request**. Fill in the PR template and describe your change clearly.

---

## 💡 Contribution Types

✅ Fix bugs
✅ Add features to parser/CLI
✅ Improve or extend the OSF spec
✅ Write examples and test documents
✅ Improve documentation, READMEs, and guides
✅ Build conversion tools or integrations
✅ Improve tooling (VSCode, LSP, etc.)

---

## ✨ Guidelines

* All PRs should target the `main` branch unless directed otherwise.
* Write clear, descriptive commit messages (e.g., `fix: handle nested bullets in slides`).
* Include tests for new functionality when possible.
* All contributors must follow our [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

---

## 🤝 Community

Join our discussions on [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/OmniScriptOSF/omniscript-core/discussions) to ask questions, propose ideas, or collaborate.

We value respectful, constructive collaboration. Your contributions help build the future of intelligent, interoperable documents!

---

## 📄 License & Ownership

By contributing, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the terms of the [MIT License](LICENSE).

OmniScript Format (OSF) is led and maintained by **Alphin Tom** ([alpha912](https://github.com/alpha912)). Please credit the creator when referencing the project.

Commit message:

docs: emphasize npm install before tests

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to OmniScript Core

Thank you for your interest in contributing to **OmniScript Format (OSF)**! We welcome contributions from everyone — whether you're fixing bugs, improving documentation, implementing new features, or helping with testing.

---

## 🚀 Getting Started

### 1️⃣ Fork the repository

Click the **Fork** button at the top right of the [omniscript-core](https://github.com/OmniScriptOSF/omniscript-core) repository page to create your own copy.

### 2️⃣ Clone your fork locally

```bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/omniscript-core.git
cd omniscript-core
git checkout -b my-feature-branch
```

### 3️⃣ Install dependencies (if applicable)

```bash
# For example, if using Node.js
npm install
```

### 4️⃣ Make your changes

* Follow the coding style used in the repo (we will provide linting configs soon).
* Add/update tests where relevant.
* Update documentation if needed.

### 5️⃣ Run tests

Before running the test suite, make sure all dependencies are installed:

```bash
npm install
npm test
# or cargo test / pytest etc., depending on the language used
```

### 6️⃣ Commit and push

```bash
git add .
git commit -m "feat: describe your change concisely"
git push origin my-feature-branch
```

### 7️⃣ Open a Pull Request

Go to your fork on GitHub and click **Compare & pull request**. Fill in the PR template and describe your change clearly.

---

## 💡 Contribution Types

✅ Fix bugs
✅ Add features to parser/CLI
✅ Improve or extend the OSF spec
✅ Write examples and test documents
✅ Improve documentation, READMEs, and guides
✅ Build conversion tools or integrations
✅ Improve tooling (VSCode, LSP, etc.)

---

## ✨ Guidelines

* All PRs should target the `main` branch unless directed otherwise.
* Write clear, descriptive commit messages (e.g., `fix: handle nested bullets in slides`).
* Include tests for new functionality when possible.
* All contributors must follow our [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

---

## 🤝 Community

Join our discussions on [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/OmniScriptOSF/omniscript-core/discussions) to ask questions, propose ideas, or collaborate.

We value respectful, constructive collaboration. Your contributions help build the future of intelligent, interoperable documents!

---

## 📄 License & Ownership

By contributing, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the terms of the [MIT License](LICENSE).

OmniScript Format (OSF) is led and maintained by **Alphin Tom** ([alpha912](https://github.com/alpha912)). Please credit the creator when referencing the project.
